contrib/vyper.asciidoc, before:

[Vyper]

= Vyper: A contract-oriented programming language
:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: There are sections in this document labelled with TODO. The TODO tag identifies pending points which are still being researched

////
Source: https://github.com/ethereum/vyper/blob/master/README.md
License: The MIT License (MIT)
Added by: @tpmccallum
////

Vyper is an experimental, contract-oriented programming language which targets the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM). Vyper strives to simplify the human readable code and in doing so provide superior auditability. One of the principles and goals of Vyper is to make it near impossible (very difficult) for developers, who use Vyper, to write misleading code. This is done in a number of ways, which we will describe below.

== The difference between Solidity and Vyper

=== Compiler

Solidity compiler C++
Vyper compiler Python

=== Syntax
Syntax is simplified in Vyper. For example in Solidity value can be transferred using two different functions a) receiver.transfer and b) receiver.send whereas in Vyper there is only one way to transfer value. By using the send(receiver, amount) function.

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Explain Variable typecasting and how this has been simplified in Vyper
:revstatus: TODO
Variable typecasting:: Typecasting is a mechanism which allows programmers to convert a variable from one data type to another data type.

Pre-conditions and post-conditions::
pre-conditions as well as post-conditions and state changes are handled explicitly, Whilst this does produce redundant code it allows for maximal readability, auditability and less confusion. The process of writing a function should include the following three steps (in this order)
1) Condition - What is the current state/condition of the state variables
2) Effects - What effects will the following code have on the state variables once executed
3) Interaction - The actual execution of logic now that the first two steps have been exhaustively dealt with

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Explain class inheritance and why Vyper does not support it
:revstatus: TODO
Class inheritance:: Classes and class inheritance underpin Object Oriented Programming (OOP). 

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Explain operator overloading and why Vyper does not support it
:revstatus: TODO
Operator overloading:: Operator overloading allows programmers to force operators, like plus (+) or equals (=), to behave differently during code execution.

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Explain dynamic loops vs static loops and why Vyper only supports static loops
:revstatus: TODO
Fixed loops:: Dynamic loops are a powerful control flow component of modern programming. They allow for the repeated execution of code.

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Explain global variables and perhaps touch on state trie (account key values) and storage trie (smart contract data)
:revstatus: TODO
Global variables:: Global variables

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Explain how constructors are implemented in Vyper and contrast with Solidity implementation
:revstatus: TODO
Constructors:: Constructors

=== Decorators 
Decorators like @public @constant @payable are declared at the start of each function.

Public decorator:: The public decorator makes the function both visible and executable publicly. For example the Ethereum wallet will even display the public functions when viewing the contract.

Constant decorator:: Functions which start with the constant decorator are not allowed to change state variables, as part of their execution. If fact the compiler will reject the entire program (with an appropriate warning) if the function tries to change a state variable. If the function is meant to change a state variable then the constant decorator is not used at the start of the function.

Payable decorator:: Only functions which declare the @payable decorator at the start will be allowed to transfer value.

Vyper implements the logic of decorators explicitly. For example, the Vyper code compilation process will fail if a function is preceeded with both a payable decorator and a constant decorator. Of course this makes sense because a constant function (one which only reads from the global state) should never need to partake in a transfer of value. Also, each Vyper function must be preceeded with either the @public or the @private decorator to avoid compilation failure. Preceeding a Vyper function with both a @public decorator and a @private decorator will also result in a compilation failure.

=== Online code editor and compiler
Vyper has its own online code editor and compiler at the following URL < https://vyper.online >. This Vyper online compiler allows you to write and then compile your smart contracts into Bytecode, ABI and LLL using only your web browser. The Vyper online compiler has a variety of pre written smart contracts for your convenience. These include a simple open auction, safe remote purchases, ERC20 token and more.

=== Compiling using the command line
Each Vyper contract is saved in a single file with the .v.py extension. 
Once installed Vyper can compile and provide bytecode by running the following command

vyper ~/hello_world.v.py 

The human readable ABI code (in JSON format) can be obtained by then running the following command

vyper -f json ~/hello_world.v.py

=== Reading and writing data
Ethereum smart contracts can write data to two places. Ethereum's global state trie or Ethereum's chain data. While it is costly to store, read and modify data, these storage operations are a necessary component of most smart contracts. 

Global state:: The state variables in a given Ethereum smart contract are stored in Ethereum's global state trie. A given smart contract can only store, read and modify data specifically in relation to that contract's address (i.e. smart contracts can not read or write to other smart contracts). TODO continue with more information about this in relation to Vyper

Log:: As previously mentioned, a smart contract can also write to Ethereum's chain data through log events. While Vyper initially employed the pass:[__]logpass:[__] syntax for declaring these events, an update has been made which brings Vyper's event declaration more in line with Solidity's original syntax. For example, Vyper's declaration of an event called MyLog was originally MyLog: pass:[__]logpass:[__]({arg1: indexed(bytes <= 3)}) Vyper's syntax has now become MyLog: event({arg1: indexed(bytes <= 3)}). It is important to note that the execution of the log event in Vyper was and still is as follows log.MyLog("123").

While smart contracts can write to the Ethereum's chain data (through log events), smart contracts are unable to read the on-chain log events, which they created. Notwithstanding, one of the advantages of writing to Ethereum's chain data via log events is that logs can be discovered and read, on the public chain, by light clients. For example, the logsBloom value in a mined block can indicate whether or not a log event was present. Once this has been established the log data can be obtained through the path of logs -> data inside a given transaction receipt.

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Just want to keep an eye on the development in Vyper GitHub in order to compare and contrast the differences between Vyper and Solidity's ERC20 Token Interface Implementation closer to ethereumbook being published. 
:revstatus: TODO
=== ERC20 Token Interface Implementation
The name, symbol, total supply and decimals variables of ERC20 tokens are publicly available using Vyper. 

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: There is a pending question in the Vyper GitHub repo < https://github.com/ethereum/vyper/issues/745 >. Whilst sharding opcodes have been implemented on a branch, the Vyper code base is yet to have sharding opcodes merged into a release. It would be nice to include updated information for the book as soon as Vyper has implemented sharding opcodes. I will revisit this. I will continue the dialog with @jacqueswww and complete this section as soon as possible.
:revstatus: TODO
=== OPCODES
The code for smart contracts is mainly written in high level languages like Solidity and now potentially Vyper. The compiler is responsible for taking the high level code and creating the lower level interpretation of the code, which is then able to be executed on the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM). The lowest representation which the compiler can distille the code to (prior to execution by the EVM) is opcodes. This being the case, each implementation of a high level language (like Vyper) is required to provide an appropriate compilation mechanism (a compiler) to allow (among other things) the high level code to be compiled into the universally predetermined and predefined EVM opcodes. A good example of this is Vyper's implementation of Ethereum's sharding opcodes.

Commit message:

Adding new URLs in the metadata
There are a couple of great resources which I have added to the pending tasks metadata.
These are the source of opcode information for the book

contrib/vyper.asciidoc, after:

[Vyper]

= Vyper: A contract-oriented programming language
:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: There are sections in this document labelled with TODO. The TODO tag identifies pending points which are still being researched

////
Source: https://github.com/ethereum/vyper/blob/master/README.md
License: The MIT License (MIT)
Added by: @tpmccallum
////

Vyper is an experimental, contract-oriented programming language which targets the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM). Vyper strives to simplify the human readable code and in doing so provide superior auditability. One of the principles and goals of Vyper is to make it near impossible (very difficult) for developers, who use Vyper, to write misleading code. This is done in a number of ways, which we will describe below.

== The difference between Solidity and Vyper

=== Compiler

Solidity compiler C++
Vyper compiler Python

=== Syntax
Syntax is simplified in Vyper. For example in Solidity value can be transferred using two different functions a) receiver.transfer and b) receiver.send whereas in Vyper there is only one way to transfer value. By using the send(receiver, amount) function.

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Explain Variable typecasting and how this has been simplified in Vyper
:revstatus: TODO
Variable typecasting:: Typecasting is a mechanism which allows programmers to convert a variable from one data type to another data type.

Pre-conditions and post-conditions::
pre-conditions as well as post-conditions and state changes are handled explicitly, Whilst this does produce redundant code it allows for maximal readability, auditability and less confusion. The process of writing a function should include the following three steps (in this order)
1) Condition - What is the current state/condition of the state variables
2) Effects - What effects will the following code have on the state variables once executed
3) Interaction - The actual execution of logic now that the first two steps have been exhaustively dealt with

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Explain class inheritance and why Vyper does not support it
:revstatus: TODO
Class inheritance:: Classes and class inheritance underpin Object Oriented Programming (OOP). 

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Explain operator overloading and why Vyper does not support it
:revstatus: TODO
Operator overloading:: Operator overloading allows programmers to force operators, like plus (+) or equals (=), to behave differently during code execution.

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Explain dynamic loops vs static loops and why Vyper only supports static loops
:revstatus: TODO
Fixed loops:: Dynamic loops are a powerful control flow component of modern programming. They allow for the repeated execution of code.

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Explain global variables and perhaps touch on state trie (account key values) and storage trie (smart contract data)
:revstatus: TODO
Global variables:: Global variables

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Explain how constructors are implemented in Vyper and contrast with Solidity implementation
:revstatus: TODO
Constructors:: Constructors

=== Decorators 
Decorators like @public @constant @payable are declared at the start of each function.

Public decorator:: The public decorator makes the function both visible and executable publicly. For example the Ethereum wallet will even display the public functions when viewing the contract.

Constant decorator:: Functions which start with the constant decorator are not allowed to change state variables, as part of their execution. If fact the compiler will reject the entire program (with an appropriate warning) if the function tries to change a state variable. If the function is meant to change a state variable then the constant decorator is not used at the start of the function.

Payable decorator:: Only functions which declare the @payable decorator at the start will be allowed to transfer value.

Vyper implements the logic of decorators explicitly. For example, the Vyper code compilation process will fail if a function is preceeded with both a payable decorator and a constant decorator. Of course this makes sense because a constant function (one which only reads from the global state) should never need to partake in a transfer of value. Also, each Vyper function must be preceeded with either the @public or the @private decorator to avoid compilation failure. Preceeding a Vyper function with both a @public decorator and a @private decorator will also result in a compilation failure.

=== Online code editor and compiler
Vyper has its own online code editor and compiler at the following URL < https://vyper.online >. This Vyper online compiler allows you to write and then compile your smart contracts into Bytecode, ABI and LLL using only your web browser. The Vyper online compiler has a variety of pre written smart contracts for your convenience. These include a simple open auction, safe remote purchases, ERC20 token and more.

=== Compiling using the command line
Each Vyper contract is saved in a single file with the .v.py extension. 
Once installed Vyper can compile and provide bytecode by running the following command

vyper ~/hello_world.v.py 

The human readable ABI code (in JSON format) can be obtained by then running the following command

vyper -f json ~/hello_world.v.py

=== Reading and writing data
Ethereum smart contracts can write data to two places. Ethereum's global state trie or Ethereum's chain data. While it is costly to store, read and modify data, these storage operations are a necessary component of most smart contracts. 

Global state:: The state variables in a given Ethereum smart contract are stored in Ethereum's global state trie. A given smart contract can only store, read and modify data specifically in relation to that contract's address (i.e. smart contracts can not read or write to other smart contracts). TODO continue with more information about this in relation to Vyper

Log:: As previously mentioned, a smart contract can also write to Ethereum's chain data through log events. While Vyper initially employed the pass:[__]logpass:[__] syntax for declaring these events, an update has been made which brings Vyper's event declaration more in line with Solidity's original syntax. For example, Vyper's declaration of an event called MyLog was originally MyLog: pass:[__]logpass:[__]({arg1: indexed(bytes <= 3)}) Vyper's syntax has now become MyLog: event({arg1: indexed(bytes <= 3)}). It is important to note that the execution of the log event in Vyper was and still is as follows log.MyLog("123").

While smart contracts can write to the Ethereum's chain data (through log events), smart contracts are unable to read the on-chain log events, which they created. Notwithstanding, one of the advantages of writing to Ethereum's chain data via log events is that logs can be discovered and read, on the public chain, by light clients. For example, the logsBloom value in a mined block can indicate whether or not a log event was present. Once this has been established the log data can be obtained through the path of logs -> data inside a given transaction receipt.

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: Just want to keep an eye on the development in Vyper GitHub in order to compare and contrast the differences between Vyper and Solidity's ERC20 Token Interface Implementation closer to ethereumbook being published. 
:revstatus: TODO
=== ERC20 Token Interface Implementation
The name, symbol, total supply and decimals variables of ERC20 tokens are publicly available using Vyper. 

:revnumber: v1.0
:revdate: 2018-04-08 (yyyy-mm-dd)
:revremark: There is a pending question in the Vyper GitHub repo < https://github.com/ethereum/vyper/issues/745 >. Whilst sharding opcodes have been implemented on a branch, the Vyper code base is yet to have sharding opcodes merged into a release. It would be nice to include updated information for the book as soon as Vyper has implemented sharding opcodes. @jacqueswww and @NIC619 have provided URLs in relation to opcodes, specifically the sharding roadmap < https://github.com/ethereum/py-evm/issues/190 > and Vitalik's Account Abstraction Proposals information < https://ethresear.ch/t/tradeoffs-in-account-abstraction-proposals/263 >. Details will be added as soon as possible.
:revstatus: TODO
=== OPCODES
The code for smart contracts is mainly written in high level languages like Solidity and now potentially Vyper. The compiler is responsible for taking the high level code and creating the lower level interpretation of the code, which is then able to be executed on the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM). The lowest representation which the compiler can distille the code to (prior to execution by the EVM) is opcodes. This being the case, each implementation of a high level language (like Vyper) is required to provide an appropriate compilation mechanism (a compiler) to allow (among other things) the high level code to be compiled into the universally predetermined and predefined EVM opcodes. A good example of this is Vyper's implementation of Ethereum's sharding opcodes.
