dev-tools.asciidoc, before:

= Development Tools, Frameworks and Libraries

== Frameworks

Frameworks can be used to ease development. By doing everything yourself you get a better understanding of how everything fits together, but it's a lot of tedious work and it's mostly doing the same over and over. These frameworks can automate some of these tasks and make development a breeze.

=== Truffle

Github link; https://github.com/trufflesuite/truffle

Website link; https://truffleframework.com

Documentation link; https://truffleframework.com/docs

+npm+ packages repository link; https://www.+npm+js.com/package/truffle


[[installing_truffle]]
==== Installing the truffle framework

The truffle framework is made of several +NodeJS+ packages. Before we install +truffle+, we need to have an up-to-date and working installation of +NodeJS+ and the Node Package Manager (+npm+).

The recommended way to install +NodeJS+ and +npm+, is to use the Node Version Manager, +nvm+. Once we install +nvm+, it will handle all the dependencies and updates for us. We'll follow the instructions found at:
http://nvm.sh

Once +nvm+ is installed on your operating system, installing +NodeJS+ is simple. We use the +--lts+ flag to tell nvm that we want the most recent "Long Term Support (LTS)" version of +NodeJS+

----
$ nvm install --lts
----

Confirm you have +node+ and +npm+ installed:

----
$ node -v
v8.9.4
$ npm -v
5.6.0
----

Looking good. Now to install truffle:

----
$ npm -g install truffle

+ truffle@4.0.6
installed 1 package in 37.508s
----

[[truffle_project_directory]]
==== Creating a truffle project directory

For each project where we will use truffle, we create a project directory and initialize truffle within that directory. Truffle will create the necessary directory structure inside our project directory. Customarily, we give the project directory a name that describes our project. For this example, we will use truffle to deploy our faucet contract from <<simple_contract_example>>, and therefore we will name the project folder +Faucet+.

----
$ mkdir faucet
$ cd Faucet
Faucet $
----

Once inside the +Faucet+ directory, we initialize truffle:

----
Faucet $ truffle init
----

Truffle creates a directory structure and some default files:

----
Faucet
├── contracts
│   └── Migrations.sol
├── migrations
│   └── 1_initial_migration.js
├── test
├── truffle-config.js
└── truffle.js
----

We will also use a number of Javascript (nodeJS) support packages, in addition to truffle itself. We can install these with npm. We initialize the npm directory structure and accept the defaults suggested by npm:

----
$ npm init

package name: (faucet)
version: (1.0.0)
description:
entry point: (truffle-config.js)
test command:
git repository:
keywords:
author:
license: (ISC)
About to write to Faucet/package.json:

{
  "name": "faucet",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "truffle-config.js",
  "directories": {
    "test": "test"
  },
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC"
}


Is this ok? (yes)
----

Now, we can install the dependencies that we will use to make working with truffle easier:

----
$ npm install dotenv truffle-wallet-provider ethereumjs-wallet
----

You now have a +node_modules+ directory with several thousand files, inside your Faucet directory.

==== Configuring truffle

Truffle creates some empty configuration files, +truffle.js+ and +truffle-config.js+. There are two configuration files because on Windows systems, the +truffle.js+ name may cause a conflict when you try to run +truffle+ the command and Windows attempts to run +truffle.js+ instead. We will delete +truffle.js+ and use +truffle-config.js+, in support of Windows users who, after all, are suffering enough already.

----
$ rm truffle.js
----

Now we edit truffle-config.js and replace the contents with:

[[truffle_config]]
.truffle-config.js - a truffle configuation to get us started
[source,javascript,linenums]
----
module.exports = {
	networks: {
		localnode: { // Whatever network our local node connects to
			network_id: "*", // Match any network id
			host: "localhost",
			port: 8545,
		}
	}
};
----

The configuration above is a good starting point. It sets up one default Ethereum network (named +localnode+), which assumes you are running an Ethereum client (such as parity), either as a full node, or as a light client. This configuration will instruct truffle to communicate with the local node over RPC, on port 8545. Truffle will use whatever Ethereum network the local node is connected to, such as the Ethereum main network, or a test network like Ropsten. The local node will also be providing the wallet functionality.

In following sections, we will configure additional networks for truffle to use, such as the +ganache+ test-RPC blockchain and Infura, a hosted network provider. As we add more networks, the configuration file will get more complex, but it will also give us more options for our testing and development workflow.

==== Using truffle to deploy a contract

We now have a basic working directory for our +Faucet+ project, and we have truffle and its dependencies configured. Contracts go in the +contracts+ subdirectory of our project. The directory already contains a "helper" contract, +Migrations.sol+ which manages contract upgrades for us. We'll examine the use of +Migrations.sol+ in a later section.

Let's copy the +Faucet.sol+ contract (from <<solidity_faucet_example>>) into the +contracts+ subdirectory, so that the project directory looks like this:

----
Faucet
├── contracts
│   ├── Faucet.sol
│   └── Migrations.sol
...
----

We can now ask truffle to compile the contract for us:

----
$ truffle compile
Compiling ./contracts/Faucet.sol...
Compiling ./contracts/Migrations.sol...
Writing artifacts to ./build/contracts
----

==== Truffle migrations - understanding deployment scripts

Truffle offers a deployment system called a _migration_. If you have worked in other frameworks, you may have seen something similar: Ruby on Rails, Python Django and many other languages and frameworks have a +migrate+ command.

In all those frameworks, the purpose of a migration is to handle changes in the data schema between different versions of the software. The purpose of migrations in Ethereum is slightly different. Because Ethereum contracts are immutable and cost gas to deploy, truffle offers a migration mechanism to keep track of which contracts (and which versions) have already been deployed. In a complex project with dozens of contracts and complex dependencies, you would not want to have to pay to redeploy contracts that haven't changed. You would also not want to manually track which versions of which contracts have been deployed already. The truffle migration mechanism does all that by deploying the smart contract +Migrations.sol+, which then keeps track of all other contract deployments.

We have only one contract, +Faucet.sol+, which means that the migration system is overkill, to say the least. Unfortunately, we have to use it. But, by learning how to use it for one contract, we can start practicing some good habits for our development workflow. The effort will pay off as things get more complicated.

Truffle's +migrations+ directory is where the migration scripts are found. Right now, there's only one script +1_initial_migration.js+, which deploys the +Migrations.sol+ contract itself:

[[1_initial_migration]]
.1_initial_migration.js - the migration script for Migrations.sol
[source,javascript,linenums]
----
include::code/Faucet/migrations/1_initial_migration.js
----

We need a second migration script, to deploy +Faucet.sol+. Let's call it +2_deploy_contracts.js+. It is very simple, just like +1_initial_migration.js+, with only a few small changes. In fact, you can copy the contents of +1_initial_migration.js+ and simply replace all instances of +Migrations+ with +Faucet+:

[[2_deploy_contracts]]
.2_deploy_contracts.js - the migration script for Faucet.sol
[source,javascript,linenums]
----
include::code/Faucet/migrations/2_deploy_contracts.js
----

The script initializes a variable +Faucet+, identifying the +Faucet.sol+ Solidity source code as the artifact that defines +Faucet+. Then, it calls the deploy function to deploy this contract.

We're all set. Let's use +truffle migrate+ to deploy the contract. We have to specify on which network to deploy the contract, using the +--network+ argument. We only have one network specified in the configuration file, which we named +localnode+. Make sure your local Ethereum client is running and then type:

----
Faucet $ truffle migrate --network localnode
----

Because we are using a local node to connect to the Ethereum network and manage our wallet, we have to authorize the transaction that truffle creates. I'm running +parity+ connected to the Ropsten test blockchain, so during the truffle migration I will see a pop-up on parity's web console:

[[parity_deployment_confirmation]]
.Parity asking for confirmation to deploy Faucet
image::images/parity_deployment_confirmation.png["Parity asking for confirmation to deploy Faucet"]


=== Ganache: A personal blockchain for Ethereum development

You can use Ganache to deploy contracts, develop your applications, and run tests. It is available as a desktop application for Windows, Mac, and Linux.

Website: http://truffleframework.com/ganache

=== Ganache CLI: Ganache as a command-line tool

This tool was previously known under the name "ethereumJS TestRPC".

https://github.com/trufflesuite/ganache-cli/

+npm+ install -g ganache-cli



=== Embark

Github link; https://github.com/iurimatias/embark-framework

Read the docs link; https://embark.readthedocs.io/en/2.6.4/

+npm+ packages repository link; https://www.+npm+js.com/package/embark

=== OpenZeppelin

Github link; https://github.com/OpenZeppelin

Website link; https://openzeppelin.org/

Read the docs link; http://zeppelin-solidity.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html

=== Dapple (?)

== Utilities


=== ethereumJS helpeth: A command line utility

helpeth is a command line tool for key and transaction manipulation that makes a developer's job a lot easier.

It is part of the ethereumjs collection of JavaScript based libraries and tools.

https://github.com/ethereumjs/helpeth

----
Usage: helpeth [command]

Commands:
  signMessage <message>                     Sign a message
  verifySig <hash> <sig>                    Verify signature
  verifySigParams <hash> <r> <s> <v>        Verify signature parameters
  createTx <nonce> <to> <value> <data>      Sign a transaction
  <gasLimit> <gasPrice>
  assembleTx <nonce> <to> <value> <data>    Assemble a transaction from its
  <gasLimit> <gasPrice> <v> <r> <s>         components
  parseTx <tx>                              Parse raw transaction
  keyGenerate [format] [icapdirect]         Generate new key
  keyConvert                                Convert a key to V3 keystore format
  keyDetails                                Print key details
  bip32Details <path>                       Print key details for a given path
  addressDetails <address>                  Print details about an address
  unitConvert <value> <from> <to>           Convert between Ethereum units

Options:
  -p, --private      Private key as a hex string                        [string]
  --password         Password for the private key                       [string]
  --password-prompt  Prompt for the private key password               [boolean]
  -k, --keyfile      Encoded key file                                   [string]
  --show-private     Show private key details                          [boolean]
  --mnemonic         Mnemonic for HD key derivation                     [string]
  --version          Show version number                               [boolean]
  --help             Show help                                         [boolean]
----

=== dapp.tools

https://dapp.tools/

Installing:
----
$ curl https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh
$ nix-channel --add https://nix.dapphub.com/pkgs/dapphub
$ nix-channel --update
$ nix-env -iA dapphub.{dapp,seth,hevm,evmdis}
----

==== Dapp
https://dapp.tools/dapp/

==== Seth
https://dapp.tools/seth/

==== Hevm
https://dapp.tools/hevm/

== Libraries

=== web3js

web3js is the Ethereum compatible JS API for communicating with clients via JSON RPC, developed by the Ethereum foundation.

Github link; https://github.com/ethereum/web3.js

+npm+ link; https://www.+npm+js.com/package/web3

Documentation link; https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/JavaScript-API

=== pyethereum

=== EthereumJS

a collection of libraries and utilities for Ethereum.

Github link; https://github.com/ethereumjs

Website link; https://ethereumjs.github.io/

=== web3j

web3j is the Java and Android library for integrating with Ethereum clients and working with smart contracts.

Github link; https://github.com/web3j/web3j

Website link; https://web3j.io

Documentation link; https://docs.web3j.io

=== Nethereum

Nethereum is the .Net integration library for Ethereum.

Github link; https://github.com/Nethereum/Nethereum

Website link; http://nethereum.com/

Documentation link; https://nethereum.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

Commit message:

Added web3.py to the libraries
I think that's what you were suggesting with 'pyethereum' right after web3js, so I just went ahead and changed it.

dev-tools.asciidoc, after:

= Development Tools, Frameworks and Libraries

== Frameworks

Frameworks can be used to ease development. By doing everything yourself you get a better understanding of how everything fits together, but it's a lot of tedious work and it's mostly doing the same over and over. These frameworks can automate some of these tasks and make development a breeze.

=== Truffle

Github link; https://github.com/trufflesuite/truffle

Website link; https://truffleframework.com

Documentation link; https://truffleframework.com/docs

+npm+ packages repository link; https://www.+npm+js.com/package/truffle


[[installing_truffle]]
==== Installing the truffle framework

The truffle framework is made of several +NodeJS+ packages. Before we install +truffle+, we need to have an up-to-date and working installation of +NodeJS+ and the Node Package Manager (+npm+).

The recommended way to install +NodeJS+ and +npm+, is to use the Node Version Manager, +nvm+. Once we install +nvm+, it will handle all the dependencies and updates for us. We'll follow the instructions found at:
http://nvm.sh

Once +nvm+ is installed on your operating system, installing +NodeJS+ is simple. We use the +--lts+ flag to tell nvm that we want the most recent "Long Term Support (LTS)" version of +NodeJS+

----
$ nvm install --lts
----

Confirm you have +node+ and +npm+ installed:

----
$ node -v
v8.9.4
$ npm -v
5.6.0
----

Looking good. Now to install truffle:

----
$ npm -g install truffle

+ truffle@4.0.6
installed 1 package in 37.508s
----

[[truffle_project_directory]]
==== Creating a truffle project directory

For each project where we will use truffle, we create a project directory and initialize truffle within that directory. Truffle will create the necessary directory structure inside our project directory. Customarily, we give the project directory a name that describes our project. For this example, we will use truffle to deploy our faucet contract from <<simple_contract_example>>, and therefore we will name the project folder +Faucet+.

----
$ mkdir faucet
$ cd Faucet
Faucet $
----

Once inside the +Faucet+ directory, we initialize truffle:

----
Faucet $ truffle init
----

Truffle creates a directory structure and some default files:

----
Faucet
├── contracts
│   └── Migrations.sol
├── migrations
│   └── 1_initial_migration.js
├── test
├── truffle-config.js
└── truffle.js
----

We will also use a number of Javascript (nodeJS) support packages, in addition to truffle itself. We can install these with npm. We initialize the npm directory structure and accept the defaults suggested by npm:

----
$ npm init

package name: (faucet)
version: (1.0.0)
description:
entry point: (truffle-config.js)
test command:
git repository:
keywords:
author:
license: (ISC)
About to write to Faucet/package.json:

{
  "name": "faucet",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "truffle-config.js",
  "directories": {
    "test": "test"
  },
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC"
}


Is this ok? (yes)
----

Now, we can install the dependencies that we will use to make working with truffle easier:

----
$ npm install dotenv truffle-wallet-provider ethereumjs-wallet
----

You now have a +node_modules+ directory with several thousand files, inside your Faucet directory.

==== Configuring truffle

Truffle creates some empty configuration files, +truffle.js+ and +truffle-config.js+. There are two configuration files because on Windows systems, the +truffle.js+ name may cause a conflict when you try to run +truffle+ the command and Windows attempts to run +truffle.js+ instead. We will delete +truffle.js+ and use +truffle-config.js+, in support of Windows users who, after all, are suffering enough already.

----
$ rm truffle.js
----

Now we edit truffle-config.js and replace the contents with:

[[truffle_config]]
.truffle-config.js - a truffle configuation to get us started
[source,javascript,linenums]
----
module.exports = {
	networks: {
		localnode: { // Whatever network our local node connects to
			network_id: "*", // Match any network id
			host: "localhost",
			port: 8545,
		}
	}
};
----

The configuration above is a good starting point. It sets up one default Ethereum network (named +localnode+), which assumes you are running an Ethereum client (such as parity), either as a full node, or as a light client. This configuration will instruct truffle to communicate with the local node over RPC, on port 8545. Truffle will use whatever Ethereum network the local node is connected to, such as the Ethereum main network, or a test network like Ropsten. The local node will also be providing the wallet functionality.

In following sections, we will configure additional networks for truffle to use, such as the +ganache+ test-RPC blockchain and Infura, a hosted network provider. As we add more networks, the configuration file will get more complex, but it will also give us more options for our testing and development workflow.

==== Using truffle to deploy a contract

We now have a basic working directory for our +Faucet+ project, and we have truffle and its dependencies configured. Contracts go in the +contracts+ subdirectory of our project. The directory already contains a "helper" contract, +Migrations.sol+ which manages contract upgrades for us. We'll examine the use of +Migrations.sol+ in a later section.

Let's copy the +Faucet.sol+ contract (from <<solidity_faucet_example>>) into the +contracts+ subdirectory, so that the project directory looks like this:

----
Faucet
├── contracts
│   ├── Faucet.sol
│   └── Migrations.sol
...
----

We can now ask truffle to compile the contract for us:

----
$ truffle compile
Compiling ./contracts/Faucet.sol...
Compiling ./contracts/Migrations.sol...
Writing artifacts to ./build/contracts
----

==== Truffle migrations - understanding deployment scripts

Truffle offers a deployment system called a _migration_. If you have worked in other frameworks, you may have seen something similar: Ruby on Rails, Python Django and many other languages and frameworks have a +migrate+ command.

In all those frameworks, the purpose of a migration is to handle changes in the data schema between different versions of the software. The purpose of migrations in Ethereum is slightly different. Because Ethereum contracts are immutable and cost gas to deploy, truffle offers a migration mechanism to keep track of which contracts (and which versions) have already been deployed. In a complex project with dozens of contracts and complex dependencies, you would not want to have to pay to redeploy contracts that haven't changed. You would also not want to manually track which versions of which contracts have been deployed already. The truffle migration mechanism does all that by deploying the smart contract +Migrations.sol+, which then keeps track of all other contract deployments.

We have only one contract, +Faucet.sol+, which means that the migration system is overkill, to say the least. Unfortunately, we have to use it. But, by learning how to use it for one contract, we can start practicing some good habits for our development workflow. The effort will pay off as things get more complicated.

Truffle's +migrations+ directory is where the migration scripts are found. Right now, there's only one script +1_initial_migration.js+, which deploys the +Migrations.sol+ contract itself:

[[1_initial_migration]]
.1_initial_migration.js - the migration script for Migrations.sol
[source,javascript,linenums]
----
include::code/Faucet/migrations/1_initial_migration.js
----

We need a second migration script, to deploy +Faucet.sol+. Let's call it +2_deploy_contracts.js+. It is very simple, just like +1_initial_migration.js+, with only a few small changes. In fact, you can copy the contents of +1_initial_migration.js+ and simply replace all instances of +Migrations+ with +Faucet+:

[[2_deploy_contracts]]
.2_deploy_contracts.js - the migration script for Faucet.sol
[source,javascript,linenums]
----
include::code/Faucet/migrations/2_deploy_contracts.js
----

The script initializes a variable +Faucet+, identifying the +Faucet.sol+ Solidity source code as the artifact that defines +Faucet+. Then, it calls the deploy function to deploy this contract.

We're all set. Let's use +truffle migrate+ to deploy the contract. We have to specify on which network to deploy the contract, using the +--network+ argument. We only have one network specified in the configuration file, which we named +localnode+. Make sure your local Ethereum client is running and then type:

----
Faucet $ truffle migrate --network localnode
----

Because we are using a local node to connect to the Ethereum network and manage our wallet, we have to authorize the transaction that truffle creates. I'm running +parity+ connected to the Ropsten test blockchain, so during the truffle migration I will see a pop-up on parity's web console:

[[parity_deployment_confirmation]]
.Parity asking for confirmation to deploy Faucet
image::images/parity_deployment_confirmation.png["Parity asking for confirmation to deploy Faucet"]


=== Ganache: A personal blockchain for Ethereum development

You can use Ganache to deploy contracts, develop your applications, and run tests. It is available as a desktop application for Windows, Mac, and Linux.

Website: http://truffleframework.com/ganache

=== Ganache CLI: Ganache as a command-line tool

This tool was previously known under the name "ethereumJS TestRPC".

https://github.com/trufflesuite/ganache-cli/

+npm+ install -g ganache-cli



=== Embark

Github link; https://github.com/iurimatias/embark-framework

Read the docs link; https://embark.readthedocs.io/en/2.6.4/

+npm+ packages repository link; https://www.+npm+js.com/package/embark

=== OpenZeppelin

Github link; https://github.com/OpenZeppelin

Website link; https://openzeppelin.org/

Read the docs link; http://zeppelin-solidity.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html

=== Dapple (?)

== Utilities


=== ethereumJS helpeth: A command line utility

helpeth is a command line tool for key and transaction manipulation that makes a developer's job a lot easier.

It is part of the ethereumjs collection of JavaScript based libraries and tools.

https://github.com/ethereumjs/helpeth

----
Usage: helpeth [command]

Commands:
  signMessage <message>                     Sign a message
  verifySig <hash> <sig>                    Verify signature
  verifySigParams <hash> <r> <s> <v>        Verify signature parameters
  createTx <nonce> <to> <value> <data>      Sign a transaction
  <gasLimit> <gasPrice>
  assembleTx <nonce> <to> <value> <data>    Assemble a transaction from its
  <gasLimit> <gasPrice> <v> <r> <s>         components
  parseTx <tx>                              Parse raw transaction
  keyGenerate [format] [icapdirect]         Generate new key
  keyConvert                                Convert a key to V3 keystore format
  keyDetails                                Print key details
  bip32Details <path>                       Print key details for a given path
  addressDetails <address>                  Print details about an address
  unitConvert <value> <from> <to>           Convert between Ethereum units

Options:
  -p, --private      Private key as a hex string                        [string]
  --password         Password for the private key                       [string]
  --password-prompt  Prompt for the private key password               [boolean]
  -k, --keyfile      Encoded key file                                   [string]
  --show-private     Show private key details                          [boolean]
  --mnemonic         Mnemonic for HD key derivation                     [string]
  --version          Show version number                               [boolean]
  --help             Show help                                         [boolean]
----

=== dapp.tools

https://dapp.tools/

Installing:
----
$ curl https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh
$ nix-channel --add https://nix.dapphub.com/pkgs/dapphub
$ nix-channel --update
$ nix-env -iA dapphub.{dapp,seth,hevm,evmdis}
----

==== Dapp
https://dapp.tools/dapp/

==== Seth
https://dapp.tools/seth/

==== Hevm
https://dapp.tools/hevm/

== Libraries

=== web3js

web3js is the Ethereum compatible JS API for communicating with clients via JSON RPC, developed by the Ethereum foundation.

Github link; https://github.com/ethereum/web3.js

+npm+ link; https://www.+npm+js.com/package/web3

Documentation link; https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/JavaScript-API

=== web3.py

web3.py is a Python library for interacting with the Ethereum blockchain. It now lives in the Ethereum Foundation's GitHub too.

Github link; https://github.com/ethereum/web3.py

PyPi link; https://pypi.python.org/pypi/web3/4.0.0b9

Documentation link; https://web3py.readthedocs.io/

=== EthereumJS

a collection of libraries and utilities for Ethereum.

Github link; https://github.com/ethereumjs

Website link; https://ethereumjs.github.io/

=== web3j

web3j is the Java and Android library for integrating with Ethereum clients and working with smart contracts.

Github link; https://github.com/web3j/web3j

Website link; https://web3j.io

Documentation link; https://docs.web3j.io

=== Nethereum

Nethereum is the .Net integration library for Ethereum.

Github link; https://github.com/Nethereum/Nethereum

Website link; http://nethereum.com/

Documentation link; https://nethereum.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
