ens.asciidoc, before:

== Ethereum Name Service (ENS)

The _Ethereum Name Service (ENS)_ is one of the first Ethereum DApps, offering a decentralized name registry for Ethereum. It can be compared to the Domain Name System (DNS), but unlike DNS which is partially centralized, ENS is completely decentralized.


=== Name resolution services

* What is a name resolution service?
* Why another one?
* Why are they needed (addresses, contracts, swarm objects, etc.)
* Benefits (security, disambiguation, redirection/upgrade, readability/user experience)
* Concerns about squatting, trademarks, dispute resolution

=== History of Ethereum name services

ENS is not the first name registration service in Ethereum. It was preceded by "NameReg" ...

=== The ENS specification: ERC-137

////
Is this an EIP? Or just an ERC?
////

Describe the standard

=== ENS contract interface

=== The ENS DApp

=== Registering a name

==== The ENS auction

===== Why an auction?

===== Timeline of an ENS auction

===== Making a bid

===== Finaliing an auction

=== Setting an ENS name resolver

==== Types of resolvers

==== Address resolver

==== Smart contract resolver

==== Swarm object resolver

=== ENS subdomains

==== Creating a subdomains

=== ENS secondary markets

==== Buying and selling names

==== Renting a name

=== Conclusion


Links:

https://ens.domains/

https://mycrypto.com/#ens

https://manager.ens.domains/

https://registrar.ens.domains/

https://github.com/ethereum/ens/

https://docs.ens.domains/

Commit message:

ENS timeline image added to doc

ens.asciidoc, after:

== Ethereum Name Service (ENS)

The _Ethereum Name Service (ENS)_ is one of the first Ethereum DApps, offering a decentralized name registry for Ethereum. It can be compared to the Domain Name System (DNS), but unlike DNS which is partially centralized, ENS is completely decentralized.


=== Name resolution services

* What is a name resolution service?
* Why another one?
* Why are they needed (addresses, contracts, swarm objects, etc.)
* Benefits (security, disambiguation, redirection/upgrade, readability/user experience)
* Concerns about squatting, trademarks, dispute resolution

=== History of Ethereum name services

ENS is not the first name registration service in Ethereum. It was preceded by "NameReg" ...

=== The ENS specification: ERC-137

////
Is this an EIP? Or just an ERC?
////

Describe the standard

=== ENS contract interface

=== The ENS DApp

=== Registering a name

.ENS timeline for registration
image::images/ens-flow.png[]

////
Image with permission from Chris Remus, Nick Johnson and Alex Van de Sande, via article by Chris Remus
////

==== The ENS auction

===== Why an auction?

===== Timeline of an ENS auction

===== Making a bid

===== Finaliing an auction

=== Setting an ENS name resolver

==== Types of resolvers

==== Address resolver

==== Smart contract resolver

==== Swarm object resolver

=== ENS subdomains

==== Creating a subdomains

=== ENS secondary markets

==== Buying and selling names

==== Renting a name

=== Conclusion


Links:

https://ens.domains/

https://mycrypto.com/#ens

https://manager.ens.domains/

https://registrar.ens.domains/

https://github.com/ethereum/ens/

https://docs.ens.domains/
