glossary.asciidoc, before:

[preface]
== Quick Glossary

This quick glossary contains many of the terms used in relation to Ethereum. These terms are used throughout the book, so bookmark this for a quick reference.

////

Please add terms here, by doing a pull request!

If you can't write a definition, then do a pull request to add only the words you think should be defined and leave the definition empty for someone else to add later.


////


address::
    Most generally this is the place where you receive transactions on the blockchain. More specifically it is the right most 160-bits of a Keccak hash of a ECDSA public key.

Account::
    An object containing an address, balance and nonce, and optional storage and code. An account can be a contract account or an EOA (externally owned account).

// What is the case convention - bitcoin or Bitcoin?
BIP::
    Bitcoin Improvement Proposals.  A set of proposals that members of the bitcoin community have submitted to improve bitcoin. For example, BIP-21 is a proposal to improve the bitcoin uniform resource identifier (URI) scheme.

big-endian::


Block::
    A block is added to the Ethereum network by miners and is a collection of required information (a block header) about the comprised transactions, and a set of other block headers known as ommers.

blockchain::
	A list of blocks validated by the proof-of-work system, each linking to its predecessor all the way to the genesis block. This varies from the Bitcoin protocol's in that it does not have a block limit, it instead uses varying gas limits.

compiling::
	Converting code written in a high-level programming language (e.g. Solidity) into a lower level language (e.g. EVM bytecode).

contract account::
    An account containing code that executes whenever it receives a transaction from another account (EOA or contract).

// Should this just say "most nodes"?
consensus::
    When several nodes, usually most nodes on the network, all have the same blocks in their locally-validated best block chain.
    Not to be confused with consensus rules.

consensus rules::
    The block validation rules that full nodes follow to stay in consensus with other nodes. Not to be confused with consensus.

contract creation transaction::
	A special transaction, with the "zero address" as the recipient, that is used to register a contract and record it on the Ethereum blockchain (see "zero address").

ECDSA::
    Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm or ECDSA is a cryptographic algorithm used by Ethereum to ensure that funds can only be spent by their rightful owners.

EIP::
    Ethereum Improvement Proposals are standards for the Ethereum platform. An EIP is a design document providing information to the Ethereum community, describing a new feature or its processes or environment. For more information, see https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs (also see the definition for ERC, below).

EOA::
    Externally Owned Account. These are accounts created by or for human users of the Ethereum network.

ERC::
    Ethereum Request for Comments. Some EIPs are labeled as ERCs, which denotes proposals attempting to define a specific standard of Ethereum usage.

// Should we use version numbers or release names?
Ethash::
    A Proof-of-Work algorithm for Ethereum 1.0. For more information, see https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Ethash

Ether::
    Ether is the Ethereum cryptocurrency (ETH) to be used for paying for gas when executing Smart Contracts. Its currency symbol is Ξ, Greek uppercase letter, Xi. See also gas.

event::
    An event allows the use of EVM logging facilities, which in turn can be used to “call” JavaScript callbacks in the user interface of a dapp, which listen for these events. For more information, see http://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/develop/contracts.html#events

EVM::
    Ethereum Virtual Machine. The EVM is a simple stack-based architecture. In Ethereum, the execution model specifies how the system state is altered given a series of bytecode instructions and a small tuple of environmental data.
    This is specified through a formal model of a virtual state machine, known as the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM).

// The word currency here might 'clash' with Ether.
gas::
    A virtual currency used in Ethereum to constrain computation of smart contracts. The Ethereum Virtual Machine uses an accounting mechanism to measure the consumption of gas and constrain (limit) the consumption of computing resources. See Turing-Complete.
    Gas is a unit of computation that is incurred per instruction of Smart Contract executed. The gas is pegged at Ether cryptocurrency. The gas is analogous to talk time on a cellular network. Thus, the price of running a transaction in fiat currency is `gas * (ETH/gas) * (fiat currency/ETH)`.

genesis block::
	The first block in the blockchain, used to initialize a particular network and its cryptocurrency.

hash::
   A fixed-length fingerprint of variable-size input produced by a hash function.

HD wallet::
    Wallets using the Hierarchical Deterministic (HD Protocol) key creation and transfer protocol (BIP32).

HD wallet seed::
    HD wallet seed or root seed is a potentially-short value used as a seed to generate the master private key and master chain code for an HD wallet.

// In case of Ethereum, perhaps, includes a blockchain explorer too?
IDE (Integrated Development Environment)::
	An integrated user interface that combines a code editor, compiler, runtime, and a debugger.

Immutable Deployed Code Problem::
  Once a contract's (or library's) code is deployed it becomes immutable. Being able to fix possible bugs and add new features is key for the software development cycle. This represents a challenge for smart contract development.

internal transaction (also "message")::
    A transaction sent from a contract account to another contract account or an EOA.

library::
  A library in Ethereum is a special type of contract that has no payable functions, no fallback function, and no data storage. Therefore, it cannot receive or hold ether, or store data. A library serves as previously deployed code that other contracts can call for read-only computation.

message::
	An internal transaction that is never serialized and only sent within the EVM.

miner::
    A network node that finds valid proof of work for new blocks, by repeated hashing.

network::
    A peer-to-peer network that propagates transactions and blocks to every Ethereum node (network participant).

node::
    A software client that is participating in the peer-to-peer network.

nonce::
    In cryptography, the term nonce is used to refer to a value that can only be used once.

ommer::
    A child block of an ancestor that is not itself an ancestor. When a miner finds a valid block, another miner may have published a competing block which is added to the tip of the blockchain. Unlike bitcoin, orphaned blocks in Ethereum can be included by newer blocks as ommers and receive a partial block reward. The term "ommer" is the preferred gender neutral term for the sibling of a parent node, but is also referred to as an "uncle".

Paralysis Problem::
  A common powerful approach to key management for cryptocurrencies is multisig transactions, referred to more generally as secret sharing.
  But, What would happen if one of the shared keys was lost? The result would be a complete loss of all of the funds. +
  This isn’t the only bad scenario. It’s also possible that the key-share holders have different ideas about how the money should be spent, and can’t come to an agreement. +
  We use the term _Paralysis Problem_ to denote any of these awkward situations.

Paralysis Proof System::
  Paralysis Proofs help address a pervasive key-management problem in cryptocurrencies. See *Paralysis Problem*. +
  A Paralysis Proof System can tolerate system paralysis in settings where players fail to act in concert. +
  A Paralysis Proof System can be realized relatively easily for Ethereum using a smart contract.

Proof-of-Stake::
    Proof-of-Stake (PoS) is a method by which a cryptocurrency blockchain protocol aims to achieve distributed consensus. Proof-of-Stake asks users to prove ownership of a certain amount of cryptocurrency (their "stake" in the network) in order to be able to participate to the validation of transactions.

Proof-of-Work::
    A piece of data (the proof) that requires significant computation to find. In Ethereum, miners must find a numeric solution to the Ethash algorithm that meets a network-wide difficulty target.

receipt::
    Data returned by an Ethereum client to represent the result of a particular transaction, including a hash of the transaction, its block number, the amount of gas used and, in case of deployment of a Smart Contract, the address of the Contract.

reward::
    An amount, in Ether (ETH), included in each new block as a reward by the network to the miner who found the Proof-of-Work solution.

Recursive Length Prefix (RLP):: RLP is a encoding standard, designed by the Ethereum developers to encode and serialize objects (data structures) of arbitrary complexity and length.

Satoshi Nakamoto::
    Satoshi Nakamoto is the name used by the person or people who designed Bitcoin and created its original reference implementation, Bitcoin Core. As a part of the implementation, they also devised the first blockchain database. In the process they were the first to solve the double spending problem for digital currency. Their real identity remains unknown.

secret key (aka private key)::
	The secret number that allows Ethereum users to prove ownership of an account or contracts, by producing a digital signature (see public key, address, ECDSA).

SHA::
    The Secure Hash Algorithm or SHA is a family of cryptographic hash functions published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).

Serpent::
	A procedural (imperative) programming language with syntax similar to Python. Can also be used to write functional (declarative) code, though it is not entirely free of side-effects. Used sparsely. First created by Vitalik Buterin.

Solidity::
	A procedural (imperative) programming language with syntax that is similar to JavaScript, C++ or Java. The most popular and most frequently used language for Ethereum smart contracts. First created by Gavin Wood (co-author of this book).

transaction::
	Data commited to the Ethereum Blockchain signed by an originating account, targeting a specific address. The transaction contains metadata such as the gas limit for the transaction.

Vyper::
	A high-level programming language, similar to Serpent with Python-like syntax. Intended to get closer to a pure-functional language. First created by Vitalik Buterin.

wallet::
    Software that holds all your secret keys. Used as the interface to access and control your Ethereum accounts and interact with Smart Contracts.

zero address::
	A special Ethereum address, with all 20-bytes as zeros, that is specified as a destination address in the "contract creation transaction".

Commit message:

Have filled in Endianness
Added some Todos for terms that I will help clarify

glossary.asciidoc, after:

[preface]
== Quick Glossary

This quick glossary contains many of the terms used in relation to Ethereum. These terms are used throughout the book, so bookmark this for a quick reference.

////

Please add terms here, by doing a pull request!

If you can't write a definition, then do a pull request to add only the words you think should be defined and leave the definition empty for someone else to add later.


////


address::
    Most generally, this is the place where you receive transactions on the blockchain. More specifically, it is the right most 160-bits of a Keccak hash of a ECDSA public key.

Account::
    An object containing an address, balance and nonce, and optional storage and code. An account can be a contract account or an EOA (externally owned account).

// What is the case convention - bitcoin or Bitcoin?
BIP::
    Bitcoin Improvement Proposals.  A set of proposals that members of the bitcoin community have submitted to improve bitcoin. For example, BIP-21 is a proposal to improve the bitcoin uniform resource identifier (URI) scheme.

big-endian::
    This type of Endianness the most significant unit is stored first. The unit referred here is generally a bit or half of a byte in its hexadecimal representation as per context.

Block::
    A block is added to the Ethereum network by miners and is a collection of required information (a block header) about the comprised transactions, and a set of other block headers known as ommers.

blockchain::
	A list of blocks validated by the proof-of-work system, each linking to its predecessor all the way to the genesis block. This varies from the Bitcoin protocol's in that it does not have a block limit, it instead uses varying gas limits.

compiling::
	Converting code written in a high-level programming language (e.g. Solidity) into a lower level language (e.g. EVM bytecode).

contract account::
    An account containing code that executes whenever it receives a transaction from another account (EOA or contract).

// Should this just say "most nodes"?
consensus::
    When several nodes, usually most nodes on the network, all have the same blocks in their locally-validated best block chain.
    Not to be confused with consensus rules.

consensus rules::
    The block validation rules that full nodes follow to stay in consensus with other nodes. Not to be confused with consensus.

contract creation transaction::
	A special transaction, with the "zero address" as the recipient, that is used to register a contract and record it on the Ethereum blockchain (see "zero address").

ECDSA::
    Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm or ECDSA is a cryptographic algorithm used by Ethereum to ensure that funds can only be spent by their rightful owners.

EIP::
    Ethereum Improvement Proposals are standards for the Ethereum platform. An EIP is a design document providing information to the Ethereum community, describing a new feature or its processes or environment. For more information, see https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs (also see the definition for ERC, below).

EOA::
    Externally Owned Account. These are accounts created by or for human users of the Ethereum network.

ERC::
    Ethereum Request for Comments. Some EIPs are labeled as ERCs, which denotes proposals attempting to define a specific standard of Ethereum usage.

// Should we use version numbers or release names?
Ethash::
    A Proof-of-Work algorithm for Ethereum 1.0. For more information, see https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Ethash

Ether::
    Ether is the cryptocurrency used by the Ethereum ecosystem that covers gas costs when executing Smart Contracts. Its symbol is Ξ, the Greek uppercase Xi character. 

event::
    An event allows the use of EVM logging facilities, which in turn can be used to “call” JavaScript callbacks in the user interface of a dapp, which listen for these events. For more information, see http://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/develop/contracts.html#events

EVM::
    Ethereum Virtual Machine. The EVM is a simple stack-based architecture. In Ethereum, the execution model specifies how the system state is altered given a series of bytecode instructions and a small tuple of environmental data.
    This is specified through a formal model of a virtual state machine, known as the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM).

// The word currency here might 'clash' with Ether.
//

TODO: Change for Clarity

//
gas::
    A virtual currency used in Ethereum to constrain computation of smart contracts. The Ethereum Virtual Machine uses an accounting mechanism to measure the consumption of gas and constrain (limit) the consumption of computing resources. See Turing-Complete.
    Gas is a unit of computation that is incurred per instruction of Smart Contract executed. The gas is pegged at Ether cryptocurrency. The gas is analogous to talk time on a cellular network. Thus, the price of running a transaction in fiat currency is `gas * (ETH/gas) * (fiat currency/ETH)`.

genesis block::
	The first block in the blockchain, used to initialize a particular network and its cryptocurrency.

hash::
   A fixed-length fingerprint of variable-size input produced by a hash function.

HD wallet::
    Wallets using the Hierarchical Deterministic (HD Protocol) key creation and transfer protocol (BIP32).

////

TODO change for clarity

////
HD wallet seed::
    HD wallet seed or root seed is a potentially-short value used as a seed to generate the master private key and master chain code for an HD wallet.

// In case of Ethereum, perhaps, includes a blockchain explorer too?
IDE (Integrated Development Environment)::
	An integrated user interface that combines a code editor, compiler, runtime, and a debugger.

Immutable Deployed Code Problem::
  Once a contract's (or library's) code is deployed it becomes immutable. Being able to fix possible bugs and add new features is key for the software development cycle. This represents a challenge for smart contract development.

internal transaction (also "message")::
    A transaction sent from a contract account to another contract account or an EOA.

library::
  A library in Ethereum is a special type of contract that has no payable functions, no fallback function, and no data storage. Therefore, it cannot receive or hold ether, or store data. A library serves as previously deployed code that other contracts can call for read-only computation.

message::
	An internal transaction that is never serialized and only sent within the EVM.

miner::
    A network node that finds valid proof of work for new blocks, by repeated hashing.

network::
    A peer-to-peer network that propagates transactions and blocks to every Ethereum node (network participant).

node::
    A software client that is participating in the peer-to-peer network.

nonce::
    In cryptography, the term nonce is used to refer to a value that can only be used once.

ommer::
    A child block of an ancestor that is not itself an ancestor. When a miner finds a valid block, another miner may have published a competing block which is added to the tip of the blockchain. Unlike bitcoin, orphaned blocks in Ethereum can be included by newer blocks as ommers and receive a partial block reward. The term "ommer" is the preferred gender neutral term for the sibling of a parent node, but is also referred to as an "uncle".

Paralysis Problem::
  A common powerful approach to key management for cryptocurrencies is multisig transactions, referred to more generally as secret sharing.
  But, What would happen if one of the shared keys was lost? The result would be a complete loss of all of the funds. +
  This isn’t the only bad scenario. It’s also possible that the key-share holders have different ideas about how the money should be spent, and can’t come to an agreement. +
  We use the term _Paralysis Problem_ to denote any of these awkward situations.

Paralysis Proof System::
  Paralysis Proofs help address a pervasive key-management problem in cryptocurrencies. See *Paralysis Problem*. +
  A Paralysis Proof System can tolerate system paralysis in settings where players fail to act in concert. +
  A Paralysis Proof System can be realized relatively easily for Ethereum using a smart contract.

Proof-of-Stake::
    Proof-of-Stake (PoS) is a method by which a cryptocurrency blockchain protocol aims to achieve distributed consensus. Proof-of-Stake asks users to prove ownership of a certain amount of cryptocurrency (their "stake" in the network) in order to be able to participate to the validation of transactions.

Proof-of-Work::
    A piece of data (the proof) that requires significant computation to find. In Ethereum, miners must find a numeric solution to the Ethash algorithm that meets a network-wide difficulty target.

receipt::
    Data returned by an Ethereum client to represent the result of a particular transaction, including a hash of the transaction, its block number, the amount of gas used and, in case of deployment of a Smart Contract, the address of the Contract.

reward::
    An amount, in Ether (ETH), included in each new block as a reward by the network to the miner who found the Proof-of-Work solution.

Recursive Length Prefix (RLP):: RLP is a encoding standard, designed by the Ethereum developers to encode and serialize objects (data structures) of arbitrary complexity and length.

Satoshi Nakamoto::
    Satoshi Nakamoto is the name used by the person or people who designed Bitcoin and created its original reference implementation, Bitcoin Core. As a part of the implementation, they also devised the first blockchain database. In the process they were the first to solve the double spending problem for digital currency. Their real identity remains unknown.

secret key (aka private key)::
	The secret number that allows Ethereum users to prove ownership of an account or contracts, by producing a digital signature (see public key, address, ECDSA).

SHA::
    The Secure Hash Algorithm or SHA is a family of cryptographic hash functions published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).

Serpent::
	A procedural (imperative) programming language with syntax similar to Python. Can also be used to write functional (declarative) code, though it is not entirely free of side-effects. Used sparsely. First created by Vitalik Buterin.

Solidity::
	A procedural (imperative) programming language with syntax that is similar to JavaScript, C++ or Java. The most popular and most frequently used language for Ethereum smart contracts. First created by Gavin Wood (co-author of this book).

transaction::
	Data commited to the Ethereum Blockchain signed by an originating account, targeting a specific address. The transaction contains metadata such as the gas limit for the transaction.

Vyper::
	A high-level programming language, similar to Serpent with Python-like syntax. Intended to get closer to a pure-functional language. First created by Vitalik Buterin.

wallet::
    Software that holds all your secret keys. Used as the interface to access and control your Ethereum accounts and interact with Smart Contracts.

zero address::
	A special Ethereum address, with all 20-bytes as zeros, that is specified as a destination address in the "contract creation transaction".
