intro.asciidoc, before:

== Ethereum Basics

=== Control and responsibility

Open blockchains like Ethereum are secure because they are _decentralized_. That means that each user of Ethereum should control their own keys which control access to their funds and contracts. Some users choose to give up control over their keys by using a third party custodian, such as an exchange wallet. In this book, we will teach you how to take control and manage your own keys.

With that control comes a big responsibility. If you lose your keys, you lose access to funds and contracts. No one can help you regain access - your funds will be locked forever. Here are a few tips to help you manage this responsibility:

* When you are prompted to choose a password: make it strong, back it up and don't share it. If you don't have a password manager, write it down and store it in a locked drawer or safe.

* When you are prompted to back up a key or mnemonic words, use pen and paper to make a physical backup. Do not leave that task for "later", you will forget

* Do not store key material (encrypted or not) in digital documents, digital photos, online drives, encrypted PDFs, etc. Don't improvise security. Use a password manager or pen and paper.

* Before transferring any large amounts, first do a small test transaction (eg. $1 value). Once you receive the test transaction, try sending it from that wallet. This is a good time to find out you forgot the password.

* Do not send money to any of the addresses shown in this book. The private keys are listed in the book and someone will immediately take that money.

=== Choosing an Ethereum wallet

An Ethereum wallet is your gateway to the Ethereum system. It holds your keys and can create and broadcast transactions on your behalf. Choosing an Ethereum wallet is difficult. There are many different options, with different features and designs. Some are more suitable for beginners and some are more suitable for experts. Even if you choose well now, you might decide to change your choice a year from now. Ethereum itself is constantly changing and the "best" wallets change as some manage to keep up and others don't.

Don't worry! If you choose a wallet and don't like how it works, you can change wallets quite easily. All you have to do is make a transaction that sends your funds from the old wallet to the new wallet. In Ethereum (as in all open blockchains), a transaction between your own wallets is indistinguishable from and just as easy as any other transaction.

To get us started, we will choose three different wallets that we will be using throughout in many of the examples: one mobile wallet, one desktop wallet and one web-based wallet. These three wallets are good choices for the readers of this book, as they represent a broad range of complexity and features. The choice of these wallets is not an endorsement of their quality or security. They are good enough for demonstration and testing and we have to start somewhere.

Starter wallets:

MetaMask:: MetaMask is a Chrome browser extension wallet that runs in your Chrome browser. It is easy to use and convenient for testing, as it is able to connect to a variety of Ethereum nodes and test blockchains (see <<testnets>>).

Jaxx:: Jaxx is a multi-platform and multi-currency wallet that runs on a variety of operating systems including Android, iOS, Windows, Mac and Linux. It is often a good choice for new users as it is designed for simplicity and ease of use.

MyEtherWallet (MEW):: MyEtherWallet is a web-page based wallet that runs in any browser. It has many sophisticated features that we will explore in many of our examples.

We'll start by installing MetaMask on our desktop and Jaxx on our mobile (smartphone).

=== Installing MetaMask

Open the Google Chrome browser and navigate to:

https://chrome.google.com/webstore/category/extensions

Search for "MetaMask" and click on the result showing the logo of a fox. You should see the extension's detail page like this:

[[metamask_download]]
.The detail page of the MetaMask Chrome Extension
image::images/metamask_download.png["MetaMask Detail Page"]

It's important that you download the real MetaMask extension, as sometimes people are able to sneak malicious extensions past Google's filters. The real one:

* Shows the ID +nkbihfbeogaeaoehlefnkodbefgpgknn+ in the address bar
* Is offered by https://metamask.io
* Has more than 500 reviews
* Has more than 800,000 users

Once you confirm you are looking at the correct extension, click "Add to Chrome", to install it.

=== Using MetaMask for the first time

Once MetaMask is installed you should see a new icon (the head of a fox) in your browser's toolbar. Click on it to get started. You will be asked to accept the terms and conditions and then you will be asked to create your new Ethereum wallet by entering a password:

[[metamask_password]]
.The password page of the MetaMask Chrome Extension
image::images/metamask_password.png["MetaMask Password Page"]

=== Currency units

Ethereum's currency unit is called _ether_ and is subdivided into smaller units, down to the smallest unit possible which is named _wei_. One _ether_ is 1 quintilion _wei_ (1 x 10^18^ or 1,000,000,000,000,000,000). You may hear people refer to the currency "Ethereum" too but this is a common beginner mistake.

The value of ether is always represented internally in Ethereum as integer multiples of _wei_. When you transact 1 ether, the transaction encodes 10^18^ wei as the value.

Ether's various denominations have a both a _scientific name_ using the International System of units (_SI_), and a colloquial name that pays homage to many of the great minds of cryptography and computer science.

Table <<ether_units>> shows the various units, their colloquial (common) name and their SI name. In keeping with the internal representation of value, the table shows all denominations in wei (first row), with ether shown as 10^18^ wei in the 7th row:

[[ether_units]]
.Ether Denominations and Unit Names
[options="header"]
|===
| Value (in wei) | Exponent | Common Name | SI Name
| 1 | 1 | wei | wei
| 1,000 | 10^3^ | babbage | kilowei or femtoether
| 1,000,000 | 10^6^ | lovelace | megawei or picoether
| 1,000,000,000 | 10^9^ | shannon | gigawei or nanoether
| 1,000,000,000,000 | 10^12^ | szabo | microether or micro
| 1,000,000,000,000,000 | 10^15^ | finney | milliether or milli
| _1,000,000,000,000,000,000_ | _10^18^_ | _ether_ | _ether_
| 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 | 10^21^ | grand | kiloether
| 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 | 10^24^ | | megaether
|===


=== Types of accounts: EOA and contracts

==== Sending Ether from an EOA to an EOA

=== Ethereum Transaction Basics:

Compare to bitcoin: single input, single output.

Source /Destination
.......... EOA .........  contract

EOA ........ X ..........   Y

Contract..... Z   ...........  Q

Four types?

One type, four combinations

Source, dest, signature, amount, gas limit, gas price, nonce, data

Tx is simpler than bitcoin, complexity is at a higher level (EVM)

==== Gas: quick intro


==== A simple contract

==== Registering (?) the contracts

==== Using the contracts

Commit message:

sedd backup and new wallet account details

intro.asciidoc, after:

== Ethereum Basics

=== Control and responsibility

Open blockchains like Ethereum are secure because they are _decentralized_. That means that each user of Ethereum should control their own keys which control access to their funds and contracts. Some users choose to give up control over their keys by using a third party custodian, such as an exchange wallet. In this book, we will teach you how to take control and manage your own keys.

With that control comes a big responsibility. If you lose your keys, you lose access to funds and contracts. No one can help you regain access - your funds will be locked forever. Here are a few tips to help you manage this responsibility:

* When you are prompted to choose a password: make it strong, back it up and don't share it. If you don't have a password manager, write it down and store it in a locked drawer or safe.

* When you are prompted to back up a key or mnemonic words, use pen and paper to make a physical backup. Do not leave that task for "later", you will forget

* Do not store key material (encrypted or not) in digital documents, digital photos, online drives, encrypted PDFs, etc. Don't improvise security. Use a password manager or pen and paper.

* Before transferring any large amounts, first do a small test transaction (eg. $1 value). Once you receive the test transaction, try sending it from that wallet. This is a good time to find out you forgot the password.

* Do not send money to any of the addresses shown in this book. The private keys are listed in the book and someone will immediately take that money.

=== Choosing an Ethereum wallet

An Ethereum wallet is your gateway to the Ethereum system. It holds your keys and can create and broadcast transactions on your behalf. Choosing an Ethereum wallet is difficult. There are many different options, with different features and designs. Some are more suitable for beginners and some are more suitable for experts. Even if you choose well now, you might decide to change your choice a year from now. Ethereum itself is constantly changing and the "best" wallets change as some manage to keep up and others don't.

Don't worry! If you choose a wallet and don't like how it works, you can change wallets quite easily. All you have to do is make a transaction that sends your funds from the old wallet to the new wallet. In Ethereum (as in all open blockchains), a transaction between your own wallets is indistinguishable from and just as easy as any other transaction.

To get us started, we will choose three different wallets that we will be using throughout in many of the examples: one mobile wallet, one desktop wallet and one web-based wallet. These three wallets are good choices for the readers of this book, as they represent a broad range of complexity and features. The choice of these wallets is not an endorsement of their quality or security. They are good enough for demonstration and testing and we have to start somewhere.

Starter wallets:

MetaMask:: MetaMask is a Chrome browser extension wallet that runs in your Chrome browser. It is easy to use and convenient for testing, as it is able to connect to a variety of Ethereum nodes and test blockchains (see <<testnets>>).

Jaxx:: Jaxx is a multi-platform and multi-currency wallet that runs on a variety of operating systems including Android, iOS, Windows, Mac and Linux. It is often a good choice for new users as it is designed for simplicity and ease of use.

MyEtherWallet (MEW):: MyEtherWallet is a web-page based wallet that runs in any browser. It has many sophisticated features that we will explore in many of our examples.

We'll start by installing MetaMask on our desktop and Jaxx on our mobile (smartphone).

=== Installing MetaMask

Open the Google Chrome browser and navigate to:

https://chrome.google.com/webstore/category/extensions

Search for "MetaMask" and click on the result showing the logo of a fox. You should see the extension's detail page like this:

[[metamask_download]]
.The detail page of the MetaMask Chrome Extension
image::images/metamask_download.png["MetaMask Detail Page"]

It's important that you download the real MetaMask extension, as sometimes people are able to sneak malicious extensions past Google's filters. The real one:

* Shows the ID +nkbihfbeogaeaoehlefnkodbefgpgknn+ in the address bar
* Is offered by https://metamask.io
* Has more than 500 reviews
* Has more than 800,000 users

Once you confirm you are looking at the correct extension, click "Add to Chrome", to install it.

=== Using MetaMask for the first time

Once MetaMask is installed you should see a new icon (the head of a fox) in your browser's toolbar. Click on it to get started. You will be asked to accept the terms and conditions and then you will be asked to create your new Ethereum wallet by entering a password:

[[metamask_password]]
.The password page of the MetaMask Chrome Extension
image::images/metamask_password.png["MetaMask Password Page"]

[TIP]
====
The password controls access to MetaMask so that it can't be used by anyone with access to your browser.
====

Once you've set a password, MetaMask will generate a wallet for you and show you a _mnemonic backup_, consisting of 12 English words. This backup can be used in any compatible wallet to recover access to your funds should something happen to MetaMask or your computer. You do not need the password for this recovery, the 12 words are sufficient.

[[metamask_mnemonic]]
.The mnemonic backup of your wallet, created by MetaMask
image::images/metamask_mnemonic.png["MetaMask Mnemonic Page"]

[TIP]
====
Backup your mnemonic (12 words) on paper, twice. Store the two paper backups in two distant secure locations, such as a fire resistant safe, a locked drawer or a safe deposit box. Treat the paper backups like cash of equivalent value as what you store in your Ethereum wallet. Anyone with access to these words gets your money.
====

Once you have confirmed that you have stored the mnemonic securely, MetaMask shows you your Ethereum account details:

[[metamask_account]]
.Your Ethereum account in MetaMask
image::images/metamask_account.png["MetaMask Account Page"]

Your account page shows the name of your account ("Account 1" by default), an Ethereum address (0x9E713... in the example) and a colorful icon to help you visually distinguish this account from other accounts. At the top of the account page you can see which Ethereum network you are currently working on ("Main Network" in the example).

Congratulations! You have set up your first Ethereum wallet!

=== Currency units

Ethereum's currency unit is called _ether_ and is subdivided into smaller units, down to the smallest unit possible which is named _wei_. One _ether_ is 1 quintilion _wei_ (1 x 10^18^ or 1,000,000,000,000,000,000). You may hear people refer to the currency "Ethereum" too but this is a common beginner mistake.

The value of ether is always represented internally in Ethereum as integer multiples of _wei_. When you transact 1 ether, the transaction encodes 10^18^ wei as the value.

Ether's various denominations have a both a _scientific name_ using the International System of units (_SI_), and a colloquial name that pays homage to many of the great minds of cryptography and computer science.

Table <<ether_units>> shows the various units, their colloquial (common) name and their SI name. In keeping with the internal representation of value, the table shows all denominations in wei (first row), with ether shown as 10^18^ wei in the 7th row:

[[ether_units]]
.Ether Denominations and Unit Names
[options="header"]
|===
| Value (in wei) | Exponent | Common Name | SI Name
| 1 | 1 | wei | wei
| 1,000 | 10^3^ | babbage | kilowei or femtoether
| 1,000,000 | 10^6^ | lovelace | megawei or picoether
| 1,000,000,000 | 10^9^ | shannon | gigawei or nanoether
| 1,000,000,000,000 | 10^12^ | szabo | microether or micro
| 1,000,000,000,000,000 | 10^15^ | finney | milliether or milli
| _1,000,000,000,000,000,000_ | _10^18^_ | _ether_ | _ether_
| 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 | 10^21^ | grand | kiloether
| 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 | 10^24^ | | megaether
|===


=== Types of accounts: EOA and contracts

==== Sending Ether from an EOA to an EOA

=== Ethereum Transaction Basics:

Compare to bitcoin: single input, single output.

Source /Destination
.......... EOA .........  contract

EOA ........ X ..........   Y

Contract..... Z   ...........  Q

Four types?

One type, four combinations

Source, dest, signature, amount, gas limit, gas price, nonce, data

Tx is simpler than bitcoin, complexity is at a higher level (EVM)

==== Gas: quick intro


==== A simple contract

==== Registering (?) the contracts

==== Using the contracts
