keys-addresses.asciidoc, before:

[[keys_addresses]]
== Keys, Addresses

((("cryptography", "defined")))((("cryptography", see="also keys and addresses")))One of Ethereum's foundational technologies is _cryptography_, which is a branch of mathematics used extensively in computer security. Cryptography means "secret writing" in Greek, but the science of cryptography encompasses more than just secret writing, which is referred to as encryption. Cryptography can also be used to prove knowledge of a secret without revealing that secret (digital signature), or prove the authenticity of data (digital fingerprint). These types of cryptographic proofs are the mathematical tools critical to Ethereum and most blockchain systems and used extensively in Ethereum applications. ((("encryption")))((("encryption", see="also keys and addresses")))Ironically, encryption is not an important part of Ethereum, as its communications and transaction data are not encrypted and do not need to be encrypted to secure the system. In this chapter we will introduce some of the cryptography used in Ethereum to control ownership of funds, in the form of keys and addresses.

=== Introduction

Ethereum has two different types of accounts, which can own and control ether: _Externally Owned Accounts_ (EOA) and _Contracts_. In this section we will examined the use of cryptography to establish ownership of ether by externally owned accounts, ie. private keys.

((("digital keys", see="keys and addresses")))((("digital signatures", "purpose of")))Ownership of ether in EOAs is established through _digital keys_, _Ethereum addresses_, and _digital signatures_. The digital keys are not actually stored on the blockchain or transmitted on the Ethereum network, but are instead created and stored by users in a file, or simple database, called a _wallet_. The digital keys in a user's wallet are completely independent of the Ethereum protocol and can be generated and managed by the user's wallet software without reference to the blockchain or access to the internet. Digital keys enable many of the interesting properties of Ethereum, including decentralized trust and control, and ownership attestation.

Most Ethereum transactions require a valid digital signature to be included in the blockchain, which can only be generated with a secret key; therefore, anyone with a copy of that key has control of the ether. The digital signature in a Ethereum transaction proves the true owner of the funds.

((("public and private keys", "key pairs")))((("public and private keys", see="also keys and addresses")))Digital keys come in pairs consisting of a private (secret) key and a public key. Think of the public key as similar to a bank account number and the private key as similar to the secret PIN, that provides control over the account. These digital keys are very rarely seen by the users of Ethereum. For the most part, they are stored inside the wallet file and managed by Ethereum wallet software.

In the payment portion of a Ethereum transaction, the recipient's public key is represented by its digital fingerprint, called a _Ethereum address_, which is used in the same way as the beneficiary name on a check (i.e., "Pay to the order of"). In most cases, a Ethereum address is generated from and corresponds to a public key. However, not all Ethereum addresses represent public keys; they can also represent contracts, as we will see in <<contracts>>. The Ethereum address is the only representation of the keys that users will routinely see, because this is the part they need to share with the world.

First, we will introduce cryptography and explain the mathematics used in Ethereum. Next, we will look at how keys are generated, stored, and managed.  Finally, we will review the various encoding formats used to represent private and public keys, and addresses.

==== One Way Functions

==== Elliptic Curve

==== Hash Algorithms

=== Private Keys

=== Public Keys

=== Ethereum Addresses

=== Ethereum Address Formats

==== Hex Encoding without Checksum

==== Hex Encoding with Checksum in Capitalization

==== ICAP (IBAN)

https://www.royalfork.org/2017/12/10/eth-graphical-address/

https://Ethereum.stackexchange.com/questions/3542/how-are-Ethereum-addresses-generated/3619

https://Ethereum.stackexchange.com/questions/267/why-dont-Ethereum-addresses-have-checksums

https://github.com/Ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-55.md

====

Commit message:

Introduction to cryptography math and public key cryptography

keys-addresses.asciidoc, after:

[[keys_addresses]]
== Keys, Addresses

((("cryptography", "defined")))((("cryptography", see="also keys and addresses")))One of Ethereum's foundational technologies is _cryptography_, which is a branch of mathematics used extensively in computer security. Cryptography means "secret writing" in Greek, but the science of cryptography encompasses more than just secret writing, which is referred to as encryption. Cryptography can also be used to prove knowledge of a secret without revealing that secret (digital signature), or prove the authenticity of data (digital fingerprint). These types of cryptographic proofs are the mathematical tools critical to Ethereum and most blockchain systems and used extensively in Ethereum applications. ((("encryption")))((("encryption", see="also keys and addresses")))Ironically, encryption is not an important part of Ethereum, as its communications and transaction data are not encrypted and do not need to be encrypted to secure the system. In this chapter we will introduce some of the cryptography used in Ethereum to control ownership of funds, in the form of keys and addresses.

=== Introduction

Ethereum has two different types of accounts, which can own and control ether: _Externally Owned Accounts_ (EOA) and _Contracts_. In this section we will examined the use of cryptography to establish ownership of ether by externally owned accounts, ie. private keys.

((("digital keys", see="keys and addresses")))((("digital signatures", "purpose of")))Ownership of ether in EOAs is established through _digital keys_, _Ethereum addresses_, and _digital signatures_. The digital keys are not actually stored on the blockchain or transmitted on the Ethereum network, but are instead created and stored by users in a file, or simple database, called a _wallet_. The digital keys in a user's wallet are completely independent of the Ethereum protocol and can be generated and managed by the user's wallet software without reference to the blockchain or access to the internet. Digital keys enable many of the interesting properties of Ethereum, including decentralized trust and control, and ownership attestation.

Most Ethereum transactions require a valid digital signature to be included in the blockchain, which can only be generated with a secret key; therefore, anyone with a copy of that key has control of the ether. The digital signature in a Ethereum transaction proves the true owner of the funds.

((("public and private keys", "key pairs")))((("public and private keys", see="also keys and addresses")))Digital keys come in pairs consisting of a private (secret) key and a public key. Think of the public key as similar to a bank account number and the private key as similar to the secret PIN, that provides control over the account. These digital keys are very rarely seen by the users of Ethereum. For the most part, they are stored inside the wallet file and managed by Ethereum wallet software.

In the payment portion of a Ethereum transaction, the recipient's public key is represented by its digital fingerprint, called a _Ethereum address_, which is used in the same way as the beneficiary name on a check (i.e., "Pay to the order of"). In most cases, a Ethereum address is generated from and corresponds to a public key. However, not all Ethereum addresses represent public keys; they can also represent contracts, as we will see in <<contracts>>. The Ethereum address is the only representation of the keys that users will routinely see, because this is the part they need to share with the world.

First, we will introduce cryptography and explain the mathematics used in Ethereum. Next, we will look at how keys are generated, stored, and managed.  Finally, we will review the various encoding formats used to represent private and public keys, and addresses.

[[pkc]]
==== Public Key Cryptography and Cryptocurrency

((("keys and addresses", "overview of", "public key cryptography")))((("digital currencies", "cryptocurrency")))Public key cryptography was invented in the 1970s and is a mathematical foundation for computer and information security.

Most modern cryptography is based on mathematical functions that have a unique property: they are easy to calculate in one direction, but very difficult to calculate in the inverse direction. Based on these mathematical functions, cryptography enables the creation of digital secrets and unforgeable digital signatures.

For example, multiplying two large prime numbers together is trivial. But given the product of two large primes, it is very difficult to find the prime factors (a problem called _prime factorization_). Let's say I present the number 6895601 and tell you it is the product of two primes. Finding those two primes is much harder than it was for me to multiply them to produce 6895601.

Some of these mathematical functions can be inverted easily if you know some secret information. In our example above, if I tell you that one of the prime factors is 1931, you can trivially find the other one with a simple division: 6895601 / 1931 = 3571. Such functions are called _trapdoor_ functions because given one piece of secret information, you can take a shortcut that makes it trivial to reverse the function.

Another category of mathematical functions that is useful in cryptography is based on arithmetic operations on an elliptic curve. In elliptic curve arithmetic, multiplication module a prime is simple but division is impossible (a problem known as the _discrete logarithm problem_). Elliptic curve cryptography is used extensively in modern computer systems and is the basis of Ethereum's (and other cryptocurrencies') digital keys and digital signatures.

In Ethereum, we use public key cryptography to create a key pair that controls access to ether. The key pair consists of a private key and--derived from it--a unique public key. The public key is used to receive funds, and the private key is used to create digital signatures to sign transactions to spend the funds. Digital signatures are also used to authenticate owners or users of contracts, as we will see in <<contract_authentication>>.

There is a mathematical relationship between the public and the private key that allows the private key to be used to generate signatures on messages. This signature can be validated against the public key without revealing the private key.

When spending ether, the current owner presents her public key and a signature (different each time, but created from the same private key) in a transaction to spend the ether. Through the presentation of the public key and signature, everyone in the Ethereum system can independently verify and accept the transaction as valid, confirming that the person transferring the ether owned them at the time of the transfer.

[TIP]
====
((("keys and addresses", "overview of", "key pairs")))In most wallet implementations, the private and public keys are stored together as a _key pair_ for convenience. However, the public key can be trivially calculated from the private key, so storing only the private key is also possible.
====


==== One Way Functions

==== Elliptic Curve

==== Hash Algorithms

=== Private Keys

=== Public Keys

=== Ethereum Addresses

=== Ethereum Address Formats

==== Hex Encoding without Checksum

==== Hex Encoding with Checksum in Capitalization

==== ICAP (IBAN)

https://www.royalfork.org/2017/12/10/eth-graphical-address/

https://Ethereum.stackexchange.com/questions/3542/how-are-Ethereum-addresses-generated/3619

https://Ethereum.stackexchange.com/questions/267/why-dont-Ethereum-addresses-have-checksums

https://github.com/Ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-55.md

====
